# EMBA: using the Bayesian Brain to investigate the specificity of emotion recognition differences in autism and ADHD

Mutual social interactions require people to be aware of the affective state of their counterpart. An important source for this is facial expressions, which can be indicative of the emotions experienced by the other person. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often have difficulties with this function. Despite the extensive documentation of such differences, it is still unclear which processes underlie attenuated emotion recognition in ASD. In this project, we aim to use a prominent human brain theory called the Bayesian Brain to evaluate the impact of three mechanisms on emotion recognition in individuals with ASD at the neural and behavioural levels: (1) emotional face processing, (2) learning of associations between contextual cues and facial expressions associated with emotions, and (3) biased attention for faces. We also plan to include individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as clinical controls in addition to a sample of people with no neurodevelopmental disorder. This allows us to determine whether differences in emotion recognition can be attributed to attentional deficits or are unspecific for the included developmental disorders. The results of this project will not only shed more light on the causes of deficits in emotion recognition in people with ASD, but also provide the basis for developing a model of the similarities and differences in processes of the Bayesian Brain in neurodevelopmental disorders.

## Probabilistic associative learning (PAL)

In this repository, we will focus on the probabilistic associative learning (PAL) paradigm. This paradigm was adapted from Lawson et al. (2017, 2021). Contrary to the original task, the participant here is presented with facial expressions associated with fear and happiness and their task is to judge as fast and accurately as possible whether the facial expression is associated with a positively or negatively valenced emotion. Before each face, a high or low tone is played, which can be predictive for the outcome of the following decision. Lawson and colleagues have shown that adults with autism show increased updates of learning rates on the level of the environmental volatility while showing decreased updates of learning rates on the level of the probabilistic outcomes.

Participants also perform three additional paradigms: a dot-probe task to measure face attention bias (FAB), a probabilistic learning paradigm (PAL) and a visual mismatch task (VMM). The preregistrations for this project are on [OSF](https://osf.io/znrht). The preregistrations will be made public when manuscripts are submitted. 

This repository is a work in progress. The scripts are continuously augmented.
